Humans’ deeply-seated desire to guess the future has a multi-billion dollar market now. Blockchain technology has enabled a transparent and censorship-resistant access to forever manipulated and opaque ‘prediction markets’. In this article, we talk about various aspects of two such markets (SportX and PlotX) on Polygon.

In 1957 Dr Arvid Carlsson discovered Dopamine, a neurotransmitter responsible for human pleasure, satisfaction and motivation. Expecting or achieving any reward which could simulate your senses — has been found to trigger a flood of this chemical in the human brain making us feel good about ourselves. As the world slowly turns into a dreadful place – a place where you spend most of your time sitting inside your room staring at a shiny screen – the ‘on-screen dopamine’ market’s size has never been any greater. The market of smartphones, eCommerce, gaming, information technology and social media have seen valuations greater than any other industry in the last decade. There’s one more sector that has got enormous in size but never gets talked about in the mainstream. The prediction markets!

Human beings love to predict the future and take pride in the positive outcomes of our ‘risky predictive decisions.’ That’s what has made astrology a billion-dollar market. But when it comes to ‘size’ - sports betting as an industry is one of the biggest prediction markets forecast to more than double in the next 7 years to over $140 billion.

Fig.1 Graphical illustration on Growth Forecast for Sports Betting Market over next 7 years (Source: Mentioned in the Figure)

In the last five years, blockchain technology has witnessed enormous growth. From the concept of digital money to digital gold to decentralized computers, it has been an ever-evolving tech revolution in itself. Polygon – an Ethereum scaling blockchain infrastructure provides a robust decentralized platform for such prediction markets to flourish. Let us review how on-screen dopamine markets have been doing on Polygon. There are two major prediction markets operational on Polygon – SportX and PlotX.

SportX (SX Network)

SportX is the world’s largest blockchain betting platform residing on SX Network, Polygon’s first Layer-2 blockchain aimed at scaling betting dApps, DeFi and NFTs. It has an all-time volume of more than $100 million with weekly revenue of $100,000. Not only has it retained its unique users despite the market slump in the past 3 months, we believe it’s well-positioned to ride the coming boom in blockchain-enabled sports betting.

Fig.2 Growth in Betting Volume on SportX over last 23 weeks (Source: sxweekly.substack.com)

One can create, trade and settle ‘crypto-based’ political and sports prediction markets on this platform. Through governance and divestment of ownership to the community, it aims to provide community access to a transparent and robust betting platform. With SportX, any user can either offer or take a bet (limitless) providing a fair opportunity to users by removing intermediaries. You can enter at your own odds. This is different from a conventional sportsbook - a central limit order book model.

The whole betting infrastructure has two major components:

1. Makers

Makers are people (manual) or platform’s API (automated) involved in generating bets. Along with manual and automated bets generators, SportX has another very interesting component for placing bets which is ‘SportX AMM’. It is a replacement for the sportsbook model and facilitates peer-to-peer betting by incorporating intelligent systems to protect users from ‘jump risk’ and ‘impermanent losses’.

This AMM is a set of smart contracts where liquidity providers put their capital in hope of making profits and get LP tokens in return. Bets generated by makers are placed against these smart contracts (AMM) and are then executed further. If AMM makes a profit, then these LP-tokens can be exchanged for a greater amount of the capital LPs initially put in.

2. Takers

When the bets from makers and AMM are flashed on SportX’s betting interface, takers can place an order on the ‘side’ of the bet they prefer. After this capital is deposited by the taker, the whole pot deposited by every party involved in that bet (makers, AMM, taker) is now shifted to an escrow wallet where it waits till the settlement is concluded.

Fig.3 Order/Bet Flow on SportX.bet (Source: docs.sportx.bet)

For facilitating this whole process, SportX charges the winning party a 4% fee on their profits.

Let us simulate the SportX performance over the next 52 weeks, or about a year, based on historical data. This simulation is based on average growth in SportX’s volume over the last 23 weeks (first week ending on 15th Aug 2021). Further simulations are based on linear reductions of growth rate by 10%. Weekly volume can grow to as much as $752.66M, given the current growth rate of 9.96% in the next 12 months with weekly revenue jumping to around $15M. SportX can remain at the valuation (current market cap = ~$31M) even if the volume grows at 60% of the current growth rate.

Fig.4 Simulated Volume and Revenue for SportX after 1 Year

As currently, SportX is the only contributor to SX Network’s revenue, they can be said to have the same valuations.

Talking of other growth catalysts — Exodus, a wallet with over 1M+ monthly active users has integrated SportX directly into their wallet. So, I don’t think you can really afford to fade it, can you? Now as we are convinced about the capabilities of one of our on-screen dopamine markets, let’s explore another one.

PlotX

PlotX is another decentralized and non-custodial betting platform on Polygon where traders can earn rewards every hour by predicting the price actions of different cryptocurrencies. The platform plans to introduce sports betting in near future.

Users can place bets on cryptocurrency price moves by selecting a market cycle or time-frame (1 hour, 1 day, 1 week etc). Predictions have three options – price going up, down or staying flat (range bound). There’s a pool for each option and the traders with the ‘winning option’ receive the assets from the other two pools as a reward.

Market creators on PlotX bootstraps the liquidity for three option pools, in return for which they get:

1/3rd of their initial liquidity

40% of PlotX’ Fee

5% of total Reward Pool

Rewards from winning prediction just like a regular user (market creator makes a prediction in each pool, so there’s always a 33% guarantee to win)

Total amount of $PLOT (plotX’s native token) used in predictions on the platform in a month is called Gross Merchandise Value (GMV). Historical data shows an average growth of up to 73% in GMV over the last 9 months.

Fig.5 Growth in Gross Merchandise Value for PlotX over last 9 months

It must be noted that a fixed time frame for the prediction of assets could lead to manipulative practices, like users trying to get in when the market cycle is about to end. Therefore the option prices on PlotX are inversely proportional to the time left in a market cycle. In other words, buying positions near the end could be very expensive. Also, the prices which decide results are recorded in the settlement period which occurs after the participation period is over and its extent is equal to the participation time. PlotX charges a 2% prediction fee on every prediction to cover its upkeep costs. 90% of this prediction fee goes to protocol expenses i.e to market creators (40%) and relayers (50%).

Using a similar simulation approach to that of SportX, we simulated the growth of GMV and protocol’s revenue over next 12 months.

Fig.6 Simulated GMV and Revenue for PlotX after 1 Year

We found that PlotX at its current valuation (~$10.5 million) has to maintain a monthly growth rate of around 65% to remain at-the-valuation in next 12 months. The PlotX team doesn't really consider this a major problem as they believe the ultimate aim of a decentralized system should be to exit to the community. This is very well reflected in their allocation share to market creators. So, in case of an exit to community, aspects taken into consider to calculate protocol’s revenue shall look different.

Prediction markets given to its appeal to human’s desire for stability and risk-aversion, has a huge growth potential for years to come. Historically, the biggest players in this space have been highly centralized and opaque, leading to constant concerns about manipulation. The combination of blockchain-enabled transparency, low fees and effortless scaling offered by Polygon should serve as a major catalyst for growth in prediction markets on Web3.

Resources:
